---
title: Write code for the web
date: 2024-02-04
description: Apple doesn't need developers
theme: paper
layout: text
tags:
    - tag: rant
      label: The princess is in another castle
related:
    - /react-io
---

import { RefLink } from "components/text/extra";

This is a yarn of two threads, and it got a bit long. The summary is

1. Apple doesn’t care for me as a developer

2. I should write code for the web

The story is personal, but I hope readers will find something they can relate to
in their own life stream (I guess that's the point of blogging).

## Apple doesn't care for you, Mr. Developer

Apple cares for me as a customer, but it doesn’t care for me as a developer.
This dynamic had been subconsciously griefing me for years, until I recently
consciously formulated it. The dependency arrows goes _Developer -> Apple_ and
_Apple -> Consumer_, but not the other way around.

If all developers stopped building for Apple's platforms tomorrow, Apple will
still survive, almost intact, since it doesn’t hurt their core value prop (I'll
expand this argument below). Thus, Apple has no dependency on individual
developers. They still care and collaborate with corporate dev “partners”, but
that's different.

Since companies, especially ginormous multinationals, behave in purely game
theoretic cost/benefit terms, it means Apple has no reason to care about
developers - and indeed it doesn’t.

> This isn't always the case. There are other ginormous multinationals who've
> figured that developers are a core part of their game theoretic strategy.

This realisation has made me happier since I now know my place. I can like their
products without wanting to develop for them.

---

Google has a bug. I have dynamic light/dark mode. If I search on Google, the
first search I make at night shows up in light mode. With the rest of my machine
in a subdued state, the glaring white of the background hurts my eyes.

In the morning, my laptop automatically switches back to light mode. Now, when I
search on Google, the first page shows up in an unreadable black background.

One would think that of all the leetcode certified staff, there must be someone
there who would know an O(n) algorithm for fixing this bug. But no, this bug has
persisted for years, and it is unlikely to be fixed in the future until it gets
accidentally fixed as part of some overhaul.

Apologies for the snide, I know a lot of great people who work at Google. My
point is that Google isn’t fixing this bug is not because it doesn’t know how
to, but because it doesn’t care. This bug has zero impact on its bottom line.

The people like me who use alternate search engines like DDG have already moved
on years ago. The rest of the (overwhelming) majority is stuck with Google. No
matter how bad their search is - UX or results - they have a captive audience.

> I think DDG etc also have a marketing blind spot - they keep pitching
> themselves as a more privacy friendly alternative, they never go after the
> main course. I don’t use DDG because of its privacy benefits, I use it because
> it reminds me of early Google - simple low clutter UX, good quality verbatim
> search results, and unobtrusive ads.

Okay Manav, but I thought you were ranting about Apple, why bring in Google?

Google is an example where I never grieved much because I understood the
dynamics. I know that I, the customer, am not their game theoretic target. So
when I have to invariably use their products and face another user hostile
interaction, I can usually shrug it off and move on. I know that Google has
entered a rent seeking phase, and while it is sad that the world is giving all
its video content up to it for even more of a hostage situation in the future,
but that’s for governments to deal with.

With Apple I didn’t understand the dynamics.

---

2009-ish. I struggled to find a computer for my mom. Windows (at that time, I
don’t know now) was just too insecure. Linux required constant tech support.
Eventually I had prepared for her an OpenBSD machine (really!) running Firefox,
and a basic game (bubbles I think).

It worked without requiring any tech support for months when I was not around.
And I was ensuring her data safety and privacy.

Obviously, this was not ideal. It fulfilled some goals, and she was surprisingly
happy with it, but I was not happy about how this was such a shrivelled parody
of what things could be, and how it limited the ways she could use computers to
help her in her life.

Then I joined a new job as a developer for a company that was making iOS apps.
After a week or so of using the mac at work it hit me - _this is the computer I
wanted for my mom!_

That is Apple’s value prop.

As soon as I could cobble up enough salary I bought her a MacBook. And
heartfeltly thanked Steve Jobs for engendering it.

The earth has done many a revolutions since then, and Jobs has left earth, and
the form factor my mother uses has changed from a laptop to an iPad. But it
still satisfies that core value prop.

---

Even if there were no apps in my phone, I would still buy an iPhone.

The people running Apple know all this. In the deep dungeons of Menlo Park when
there are meetings of the core council, after all the sacrificial lambs have
been slain and the blood and gore washed away, out comes the elder spreadsheet
that encodes Apple’s business model, but nowhere in them is any cell, input or
output, which involves developers.

Sure, Apple wouldn’t mind if developers are happy. But it knows it doesn’t need
to care if they are.

This lack of caring is never expressed out loud. It isn’t some conspiracy, it
just is one of those things - you wouldn’t walk up to someone who you don’t care
about and tell them you don’t care.

Unfortunately all this results in sometimes quite schizophrenic behaviour on
Apple’s part, especially since there are many individuals working at Apple who
do care about developers and are trying to make things better.

---

2016-ish. As part of my annual Apple simping I was watching WWDC when they
announced Apple Music APIs.

I was ecstatic. My coworkers were puzzled at my ecstasy, “All this, can’t we
already do with Spotify’s API?”. I didn’t know how to answer that, so I just
repeated how _this changes everything_.

Of course, as is usual, I was wrong. It didn’t change everything. In fact, it
didn’t change _anything_.

Apple’s own music player was (and still is) unusably bad. Even talking about it
makes me angry. The people making it can’t be so incompetent, and it seems to be
working for the rest of the world, so I've never known what to make of this
situation. With the APIs out, maybe things will change.

But nothing happened. Apple’s own player continues to make my blood pressure
high anytime I have to use it. And whatever alternative players I have tried
just all seem to go for the same generic “Spotify” approach to music. I guess it
is because the people who're making these apps were never around in the Justin
Frankel era of Winamp, and haven't seen how a music player can provide a
seamless, endless _yet_ still personal approach to music. That era is not coming
back because it relied on piracy, but luckily that's not a problem! and that's
the great thing about Apple Music's catalog. We can recreate that experience
without needing to sail the high seas.

Enough of the backstory. I recently had a bunch of free time, so I thought I’ll
write a player. Mostly for myself, but I also wanted to write a tutorial. This
is what I wrote in the README in the first commit:

> Here I'll be writing down my notes as I build Flowers. The world needs not one
> music player, or two, but many: each of us has our own way of connecting with
> music, and so maybe these notes will help others build the flower they want,
> nay need.

Cute, dumb, and in vain. As I went about it, I realized that 8 years down the
line, not is the API still buggy, it is still not public!

Firstly you need to pay Apple. No, not for bulk usage etc, _just to try out the
API_. So there there goes my dream of writing a walkthrough - nobody’s going to
pay Apple 100 bucks just to try things out. And it explains why there has been
no innovation.

But that's not even it - Even if you pay them, you get a restricted API.

The point where I disgustedly gave up was when I found out that while I was
jumping all these kafkaesque hoops, instead you could just go to Apple's own web
music player, type `MusicKit.getInstance().developerToken` in your browser
console, and you’ll get an unrestricted token for free! <RefLink
href="https://developer.apple.com/forums/thread/702228" />

---

All these anecdotes Manav, what does all this mean?

## Write code for the web

Write code for the web. We’re lucky to have a shared platform that no single
entity owns. Even benevolence can be ruined by incompetence.

The web platform is in a precarious place – overreaching governments, browser
duopolies, a complex developer ecosystem – so it is not a given it’ll remain
thriving. But so far it has survived, and every year longer it survives, the
longer it’ll survive.

Ironically Google is the good guy here, they’re doing great work for the web. On
the other hand, literally every single workaround I’ve had to write in the
recent past in my web related code has been due to Safari's princessness.

## There are no good guys, there are good actions

Which brings me to the third thread of this story, how all this made me
reevalute my relationship with companies.

Someone who has more of a grip on living than me once told me that it's not
useful to put people into the bucket of good and bad. People are a mix. Bad
folks can do good actions sometimes, and vice versa.

I don't know to what extent I've been able to internalize this point, but that's
for another day. What I realized was that the same applies to companies.

Companies are like people. I don't know if they're sentient, but otherwise they
share many attributes with us: they're intelligent (they were the AI before AI),
have personalities, they are born, thrive, live and die, they're even legal
persons.

Just like we can't live without other people, we can't live without companies.
They have many inhumane characteristics, but like them or not, such fractal
conceptions of human organizations will always be.

By not labelling companies into buckets of good or bad, I can now have a
healthier interaction with them, and can more fluidly adapt myself - I can
reduce my dependence on them when they turn out to be trying to put me in a zero
sum game, and on the flip side reengage more with them if they're willing to be
more symbiotic. Nothing is set in stone, really.
