---
title: The promise of words
date: 2023-09-29
description: Words are beautiful, but they're like promises, and are they any good?
colors:
    - oklch(50% 0.22 29.23)
    - oklch(20% 0 0)
---

import * as C from "./components.tsx";

<C.EssayContainer>

Writing words, logical arguments. It is fun when I am constructing these
elaborate structures, but is it useful? I can make them as elaborate as I want,
but are they true?

This very village of words right here, growing in front of my eyes to be a
metropolis, does this have any semblance to reality?

Words are beautiful. Each word is a frozen metaphor, spanning ages and
languages. Each sentence takes these already extraordinarily beautiful,
extraordinarily complex structures in abstract space that our minds can
comprehend but our bodies can't, and then hooks some of their appendages to some
of the ones of the some those of the other. Sentences are a linear rendition of
an intricate sculpture in a very large dimensional space. The fact they are
linear isn't a problem, really, in fact it just adds to their beauty, just like
how books are more powerful than moving pictures in transporting us to what is
not. This is the same reason that writing code has been the only realistic
approach we have to capture the multi-faceted connectedness of what we're trying
to communicate to a computer. Over time, code will perhaps be subjugated to
natural language as computers gain the ability to converse in them. Or maybe
not, since maybe code is not just linear, it is two-dimensional, more like 1.5
though, and so maybe like poetry, it has a bit different than language.

But I digress.

Most people are unaware of the absolute monstrosity of the abstract kingdom of
Mathematics that has been constructed over thousands of years by tens of
thousands of people disconnected in space and time. A castle of unimaginable
proportions, with deep dungeons and intricate tapestry, all constructed in
abstract space, without any solid ground underneath it, yet still standing
solid, and growing on. A castle that is not written down anywhere, it doesn't
even exist anywhere, but is the basis of the physical computer that I write
these words on, and whose laws make possible the programming languages that
animate the souls of those machines.

So yes, words can be useful. Words can be useful, that's why we talk.

But then why am I having this sinking feeling of following the wrong trail in a
deepening evening as I go about constructing these elaborate, meaningless
sculptures?

Is it because they bind me to some truth that I know, for sure, is contingent
currently and ultimately false?

Or am I to realize that words don't have the power to bind me, and I can play in
them regardless of the shadows they may cast to the people looking on?

</C.EssayContainer>

<C.Title />

<C.Footer />
