---
title: Acid, doctor
date: 2024-07-28
description: Critical periods, psychedelics and imprinting
theme: paper
layout: text
unlisted: true
---

Animals (and me, and you) have critical periods. e.g. a baby chick will imprint
whatever is around for the next 48 hours after hatching as their mother.

It is not as drastic in humans, but it does happen. Two well studied examples:

-   Vocal accents are imprinted in the formative years of a child.

-   Children with cataracts, if left untreated in their formative years, remain
    blind even if the cataracts are removed later (the eyes can see, but the
    brain can't).

Each critical period corresponds to changes in the neurobiology. That is, the
changes are not just psychological but functional; the brain structures are more
"open" in the respective modality during its critical period.

What seems to be happening is that in lieu of encoding language or vision etc in
the genes, the instead brain imprints language and vision from its environment
during these critical periods. When the critical period passes, the brain stops
this imprinting.

Not only does this save on genetic space, this is also arguably more adaptive to
changes in the environment. For example. an immigrant's child has to live in
their new environment, so it is better they pick up their new environment's
accent instead of the ones they might've (hypothetically) gotten genetically
from their parents.

Critical periods happen after childhood too.

Teenage years, and the immediate aftermath of trauma are both critical periods
where the brain is open to imprinting the PFC (pre-frontal cortex) and memory,
respectively.

Harmful imprinting during any of the critical periods cannot be "unlearned", at
least not easily, because the brain is neurobiologically not open anymore to
"overwrite" what got imprinted. e.g. (but not only) PTSD.

So far, I've described what critical periods are, and why they're important. In
my current understanding, this is also the current scientific consensus. (e.g.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6526538/)

Now lets move to the psychedelics. The claim is - psychedelics reopen critical
periods. This allows a therapist (or the person themselves introspectively) to
"overwrite" what got imprinted.

This matches cultural memes. "Hanging up the phone when you get the message".
"Set and setting".

> Disclaimer: These are just notes I wrote after hearing the podcast with Gul. I
> don't know if any of this is true, I just found it fascinating - both that
> there are neurobiological critical periods, and that they can be supposedly be
> reopened using trace amounts of chemicals.
