---
title: Destination Moon or Moscow
date: 2023-09-24
description: The dreams of space are what propel many a man, and is a great way to keep mankind aligned.
theme: paper
layout: text
tags:
    - tag: rant
      label: Everything tastes good in a soup
related:
    - "/come"
---

import * as E from "components/text/extra.tsx";

People need food, but _many_ people also need to dream. Without a dream, a place
to go to that is not here, _some_ people cannot survive. For such people, it
used to be the call of the open sea:

<E.AttributedQuote attribution="Herman Melville, Moby Dick">

Call me Ishmael. Some years ago, never mind how long precisely, having little or
no money in my purse and nothing in particular to interest me on shore I thought
I would sail.

</E.AttributedQuote>

The sea is still here, but it is no longer the unfamiliar, unknown expanse that
it used to be. The greater of the adventurers among us still traverse the oceans
in ways that make it daunting, but for the more casual Ishmaels, it doesn't
retain the same bite.

This urge to venture out into the unknown is ultimately an imperialistic urge.
It is the urge to grow, it is the urge to becomes bigger, more powerful, more
experienced, than one is. It is a propelling force, a drive, in men, nations and
companies.

A nation that stops growing will wither. History has seen it many times, with
the prominent examples like India, or China, which reached points where they
became satiated, stopped moving outwards, and ended up being plundered.

This urge of nations to not stay still, and keep growing, manifests itself in
trade and other forms of econo-cultural conquests, and in war otherwise. But it
cannot be avoided, this urge, for not acting on it is just an invitation for the
sharks.

Not everyone is like this, of course, but some people, and many collectives of
people (companies, nations) are.

Luckily for us, there is a never-ending expanse of space still waiting for us to
venture out. Space provide a way for nations to vent this imperialistic
tendency, and continue growing, without needing to grow at the expense of the
other. It is a perfect non-zero sum game. It is the sea of our times.

Space is not the only way of course. Sports is another, more common way. But
sports have a limit of how much of this urge they can consume. When nations get
very big and powerful, it needs more than sports to keep them from stepping on
each others toes, without asking of them to stagnate in their own pools. What's
better, getting out there would likely need us to help each other, to cooperate.

I'm not making a new claim, people have recognized this earlier too. In the cold
war era, where the duopoly dynamics inevitably turned into a match with the
Soviet Union, the mindset of United States was often expressed as "Destination
Moon or Moscow". And were it not for the moon, it would've been Moscow indeed,
to the detriment of us all.

No, I'm not making a new claim. I'm just expressing a sigh of relief, and the
hope and yearning of uncharted shores, that we have the vastness of space to
sketch out, and are starting to get to a point where we have the boats to.

<E.AttributedQuote attribution="Abdul Kalam, Chief scientist ISRO & later
President of India">

Dreams are not which we see when we sleep. Dreams are what which don't let us
sleep.

</E.AttributedQuote>
